---
title: "Failing Fast, Good Coupling and Locality"
layout: blog
tags: story
date: 2025-05-19 08:00:00 -0400
---

We are told to fail fast: oxymoronically, errors exist to aid you in fixing problems. We are told coupling is bad. However, coupling is sometimes good.

I think I encountered a good microcosmic example of the importance of failing fast, *good* coupling and locality: locality meaning how close things are to where they take effect. <small>Usually it's in reference to computer memory and its impact on performance.</small> I want to discuss locality as it relates to source code and its impact on readability.

This example is about strings—[*%-formatted strings*](https://docs.python.org/2/library/stdtypes.html#string-formatting).

---

Today, I fixed a bug from two years ago.

While playing, my friend Kyle stumbled upon a funny piece of in-game text:

```python2
"Hey! Are you %s? %s from %s's Quest?!"
```

The game carried on like normal, but that piece gave us a laugh.

A quick and easy fix: just add the missing `% (character.name)` bit.

...<small>Ok, in this case, `% ((character.name,) * 3)`</small>

However, the repercussions are worrisome:

1. This pattern is used extensively throughout the codebase. *How many more times does this bug appear?*
2. This could potentially be more harmful. The program continued in this case. *If I remembered the %, but supplied the incorrect number of values, I would get a TypeError and execution would stop!*

❦

What caused this to happen?

By using *%-strings*, I am prone to these mistakes because the compiler permits them:

- Forgetting the %-values
- Including the wrong number of %-values

That means I get runtime errors instead.

In my situation, if the program had simply failed instead when it noticed the missing `% (arguments)`, I would have fixed my issue and not have to worry. I don't believe it has the power to do that though, since `%s` is dual-purposed as a percent sign, contingent on the omission of the `% (arguments)`, as I had mistakenly committed.

Now *%-strings* are a good choice for coding in a small, manageable capacity, but Toshe's Quest II has a lot of lines of code.

❦

How can I do better?

Enter [`f-strings`](https://peps.python.org/pep-0498).

*f-strings* are great because they localize the formatted string values. Instead of the string template and values being side-by-side, the values become embedded within the template:

```python2
f"Hey! Are you {character.name}? {character.name} from Toshe's Quest?!"
```

The *f-string* is easier to read, which in general reduces bugs. It also *completely eliminates* the bug scenarios I mentioned! By coupling template and values, to forget or miscount values would mean a malformed template. That would be much easier to spot.

The caveat is that this feature did not become available until Python 3. I can see now that I had to make do with what was available, given my choice to continue using Python 2. What a wild time that was! The next question to ponder might be *would it have been worth it to migrate to Python 3, and at which point during development would that have been?*